In this lecture, you'll learn how to configure inter-VLAN routing using a Layer 3 switch with a
lab demo.
So here's the lab topology,
it's the same as usual.
We've got SW1 through to SW3, and we've got our Engineering and our Sales PCs plugged
in there.
I've already configured all of the Layer 2 VLAN configuration, so I've configured trunks going
through from SW1 to SW3.
I've configured my Sales and Engineering VLAN and I've configured my access ports to put the correct PC
into the correct VLAN. Let's verify that first.
So I'll go on to SW1,
and if I do a 'show interface gigEthernet0/1 switchport',
I see that that is configured as a trunk and it's using Native VLAN 199, and if I do a 'show vlan brief',
I can see that my VLANs are being configured, and I've put the correct ports into the correct VLANs.
Let's check that everything is working okay
at Layer 2, so I go onto my ENG PC, I'll ping ENG2 at 10.10.10.11, which is on the same switch
and that's working fine, and ping 10.10.10.12 over on the other side on SW3,
and that's all good too. Obviously, if I try to ping 10.10.20.10, a PC in the Sales VLAN,
that's not going to work because I haven't configured my routing yet. So, let's do the inter-VLLAN
routing first.
So if we have a look back at the topology diagram, I'm going to use SW2 as my Layer 3 switch.
I'm going to configure SVIs on here for VLAN 10 and for VLAN 20,
so, let's do that now.
So on SW2, I'll go to the enable prompt and then global configuration,
and let's just check what we've got on here already.
So if I do a 'do show ip interface brief',
you see that I've only got the physical interfaces apart from I do have my one VLAN interface, which
is VLAN 1.
If I do
a 'do show vlan brief',
I have already configured the VLANs on here.
I don't have any access ports on this switch.
Okay, the first thing I need to do is to enable IP routing on the switch, to allow it to route between
different IP subnets. The command to do that is just 'ip routing'.
Next, I need to configure my SVIs for my Engineering and Sales VLANs.
So to do that,
I create 'interface vlan 10', which is the Engineering VLAN.
It's a logical interface, so I see
it comes up immediately, and I'm going to add IP address 10.10.10.1 with
a /24 subnet mask.
I also need to configure my interface for VLAN 20 and it's going to be IP address 10.10.20.1
25.255.255.0.
So that's all I need to do, enable IP routing and create my SVIs,
and now my PCs should be able to route to each other. So let's go on to on ENG1 and try pinging
over to the Sales
VLAN at 10.10.20.10 again.
Again, it will probably drop the first ping or two, and there we go,
it's now working.
So that's all I had to do to configure my inter-VLAN connectivity using a Layer 3 switch.
But if we go back to the topology diagram again, I also want to have external connectivity as well.
Right now, my PCs, so Engineering and Sales PCs, inside the campus have got connectivity to each other,
but I want them to have connectivity outbound as well.
So I need to configure routes from SW2 up to R1, and from R1 up to the Service
Provider, SP1.
So we were already on the switch, let's do the switch again.
So that's going to be on interface fastEthernet0/1, so on SW2, if I do a 'show ip interface brief',
I see that my VLAN interfaces will show up in here now, but I haven't configured the IP
address on fastEthernet0/1 yet.
Let me show you what happens if I try to do it
while it's a Layer 2 switchport. So I'll go 'interface fastEthernet0/1' and say 'ip address 10.10.100.1 255.255.255.0'.
It's going to give me an error message saying you can't configure an IP address on here.
What I need to do first is say 'no switchport'. That converts the physical port to a Layer 3 port,
meaning that I can put an IP address on it.
So if I now try the IP address command again, I don't get the switch complaining, and I'll do a 'no shutdown'
on here, and then a 'show ip interface brief',
and I can see that the interface is configured. It's down, down right now because I haven't configured
the interface on the other side over on R1.
So, let's do that next.
So I'll go onto R1, 'config t', and what most places normally do is if you've got a fastEthernet0/0 and
a fastEthernet0/1, use fastEthernet0/0 as the outside because the '0' looks
kind of like an 'O', and use fastEthernet0/1 as the inside because the '1' looks like an 'I' for
inside.
This keeps things a little bit more logical.
So this is going to be interface fastEthernet0/1 on the inside, and I'll configure IP address
10.10.100.2, because it was 10.10.100.1 on the switch.
I'm using a /24 mask here,
real-world,
you'd probably use a /30, and do a 'no shutdown'.
I also need to configure my outside interface, which was fastEthernet0/0, IP address
203.0.113.1 255.255.255.0 and 'no shutdown' here as well.
Let's check that
the interfaces have come up
okay, so I'll do a
'show ip interface brief'. They're up, up, so that's looks good.
I'll check
I can ping out to the Service Provider from R1, so ping
203.0.113.2,
and that's working okay as well. Let's check I can ping my PCs on the inside from R1, so I'll ping Eng1
at 'ping 10.10.10.10', and that is working okay.
Alright, so I still need to check I can ping from the PCs on the inside to the outside.
So from ENG1, I'll ping 203.0.113.2.
Okay, I'm getting a destination unreachable from the default gateway, which is SW2, so I've probably
forgot to put the route on SW2. Let's check that.
So on SW2, I'll do a 'show ip route'. I should have a static default
route
pointing upstream to R1,
and that's the problem,
I forgot to put the route on SW2. So let's fix that, I'll say
'ip route 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0',
and actually point out to R1 at 10.10.100.2. I'll check I can ping out
to the Service Provider from SW2 now, so 'ping 203.0.113.2',
and that's looking good.
So, I think we should be okay now. I'll try the ping again from the Engineering PC and yep, it can ping
out to the Internet.
So we're all good,
we've got connectivity going everywhere, and we've got the Layer 3 switches switched to acting as
the default gateway for all of the PCs.
Okay, so that was all of our different inter-VLAN routing options.
See you in the next section.